What should someone do?
Um,
if they have a hard time sleeping,
like say if you're a person who has insomnia,
you have a hard time getting,
getting to bed,
you have a hard time staying asleep when you wake up,
you can't go back to bed.
There are there strategies?
There are.
I mean I think for most people there are five things that you can do just out
the gate to get better.
Sleep regularity is probably the most important thing I can tell you.
Go to bed at the same time,
wake up at the same time,
no matter whether it's the weekend.
Weekday regularity is key.
We spoken about light,
for example,
when you in the last hour before bed,
tried to stay away from screens but also just switch off half the lights in the
house.
You'd be surprised at how supper ethic that is.
It really starts to sort of make you feel a bit more drowsy.
They done some great studies where they would take people out into the Rockies,
no electric light,
no electricity whatsoever,
and they started to go to bed two hours earlier than the acclaimed natural
bedtime.
It wasn't just because they didn't have anything necessarily to do,
it was that their Melatonin was rising,
you know,
two hours earlier.
So keep it dark.
The third is probably keep it cool.
Your brain actually needs to drop its temperature by about two to three degrees
Fahrenheit to initiate sleep.
And that's the reason that you will always find it easier to fall asleep in a
room that's too cold than too hot.
I've seen people use cold pads.
Yes.
He knows he sleep on these cold pads.
What do you think of those?
Yeah,
I mean the evidence is pretty good that cooling the body actually works.
They've um,
you know,
in the book I write about a series of studies where they had people in it,
it's almost like a wet suit,
but it has all of these veins running through it and they could actually
perfumers warm or cold water into any part of the body,
hands,
core of the body,
feet.
And so that you could exquisitely manipulate the temperature of any part of the
body.
And what they found is that they could effectively cool the body down and it
instantaneously made people fall asleep faster and it gave them deeper,
deep,
non rem sleep,
that sort of restorative sleep for the body.
So you can even look at studies where people sleep semi naked and that also
seems to improve their sleep and they get a little bit more deep sleep too.
So cold is better.
The paradox here though is that you need to warm your feet and your hands to
kind of charm the blurred away from your core out to the surface and radiate
that heat.
So you should go to sleep with socks and gloves on.
Yeah.
Or better still have a hot bath.
Um,
evidence here to um,
that I discussed where people say,
you know,
I get out of a hot bath,
I feel nice and toasty and relaxed and that's why I fall asleep.
It's the opposite.
When you get into a bath,
you get vasodilation all,
you sort of get rosy cheeks,
red skin,
all of the blood rushes to the surface.
You get out of the bath and you have this massive thermal dump of heat that just
evacuated from the body,
your core body temperature plummets.
And that's why you sleep better.
So you can hack the system very easily.
Wow.
So your core body temperature plummets and that's what makes you sleep easier.
Yeah,
that sounds so counter intuitive,
but it makes sense and it makes sense it because that's how we were designed.
If you look at hunter gatherer tribes whose way of life has not changed for
thousands of years,
and you ask how do they sleep?
One of the things that seems to dictate the sleep is the rise and fall of
temperature.
Yeah.
Temperature is at it's lowest in the d Nydia of the night,
you know,
three or four in the morning.
And as that temperature,
that climate temperature starts to drop,
that's when they start to get drowsy as if temperature is just sort of signaling
to the brain.
Now it's time to sleep.
So light as well as temperature,
a two key triggers to help you get better sleep.
Um,
if you look at those tribes by the way,
and when they go to sleep and they wake up,
um,
you know,
they go to sleep probably about two hours after dusk,
sort of eight to nine in the evening,
wake up about half an hour or even an hour before dawn.
It's the rise in temperature rather than light that triggers their awakening.
Um,
but there's a reason,
you know,
have you ever thought about what the term midnight actually means?
Middle of the night.
And that's what it should be for all of us.
But in modernity,
we've been dislocated from our natural rhythms and now midnight has become the
time when we think I should check Facebook last time.
You know,
I should send my last email.
Yeah,
that wasn't,
that is not how we were,
you know,
designed to sleep.
And in fact,
we may also be designed to sleep by physically too.
If you look at those hunter gatherers,
they don't sleep one long bout of eight hours at night.
I've heard this recently that people that you should have two sleeps,
the idea of two sleeps.
Yeah.
It's actually a little different than the idea of to sleep,
so there was a time in sort of the Dickensian era where people would sleep for
the first half of the night,
may be sort of four hours or so.
Then they would wake up,
they would socialize,
they would eat,
they would make love,
and then they would go back and have a second sleep.
If you look at natural biological rhythms in the brain and the body,
that doesn't really seem to be how we were designed.
It certainly seems to be something that we did in society,
but I think it's more of a societal trend than it was a biological edict.
However,
we do seem to have to sleep periods the way that we were designed.
Those tribes will often sleep about six and a half hours,
seven hours of sleep at night and then especially in the summer they'll have
that Siesta like behavior in the afternoon and all of us have that sort of this
what's called the Post Prandial dip in alertness just means after lunch and if I
measure your brain wave activity with electrodes,
I can see a drop in your physiological alertness somewhere between two to 4:00
PM in the afternoon.
But is that dependent on diet?
It's not.
People think it is,
you know,
especially after they've had a heavy lunch,
you can actually just have people fast instead of well fasting for long periods
of time actually makes your sleep much worse.
But you can have people abstain from lunch and you still get that drop.
So it's independent of food.
It's a genetically hardwired,
preprogrammed drop that suggests we should be sleeping by physically but does is
that dependent upon their standard diet because if,
if someone is on a carbohydrate,
carbohydrate rich diet,
a lot of times you do get that spike and then you crash,
crash.
What?
When people are on low carb and high fat diets,
they don't get that and they,
they,
they tend to be more,
even with their energy through the day.
Yeah.
So yeah,
that sort of more constant release of energy can actually help you sort of
almost combat that low.
But the low exists no matter what exactly.
So even if you don't think it exists,
it's there.
It's still present.
Interesting.
So why did they do that and then the,
the dickens error,
why did they,
what is there a root cause of their double sleep thing?
We don't know.
I mean,
it's hard to sort of really go back knitting.
Yeah.
That was a trend that it was a movement did,
they would just wake up and do things and yeah,
maybe it's because they didn't have TV,
they didn't know what to do with themselves.
It sounds like they did some pretty interesting things,
which are nice.
But yeah.